Calibration result — 2026-10-03

Outcome: useful for finding candidate passages, not ready for automatic counts
of meaningful rule evolution. No full-corpus coding or source-attribution batch
was launched. No experiment, game decision, inspector or paper result changed.

Scope and execution
-------------------
The frozen plan selected 24 ten-round trajectories, with two same-model readings
per trajectory. Sixteen broad-coverage cases spanned the corpus; eight were
purposive challenges from known earlier examples. This was never a prevalence
sample or independent human validation.

The initial version stopped early after 16 returned readings: seven passed
schema/exact-quote checks, nine exhausted the 12,000 completion-token budget.
The remaining 32 planned readings have no usable saved result. Failed/missing
outputs are not negative feature labels. About 83.5% of completion tokens in
returned responses were reasoning tokens; small JSON alone did not make this
task cheap. Three complete A/B pairs passed technical validation.

A bounded repair tested four challenges (C18, C21, C22, C24), each twice, with
the same model/high reasoning, revised semantic instructions and a 24,000-token
completion budget. All eight finished normally; seven passed exact-quote and
schema checks. C21_B failed one R10 quotation check and remains excluded from
quantitative agreement. Three complete repair A/B pairs passed. The versions
are separate measurements and must not be pooled as repeated labels.

Costs and interruptions
-----------------------
Confirmed response-reported costs: initial $1.6854636 + repair $1.356548 =
$3.0420116. Sixteen interrupted requests have no returned usage receipt; their
reserved maximum totals $2.502. Conservative cumulative accounting is therefore
$5.5440116, below the user-approved $10 cap. Actual invoice cost is not verified.

The provider used BYOK: router cost was zero, but upstream inference was not.
The first process was stopped to correct this accounting. Original settlements
and their explicit upstream-cost corrections remain in attempts.jsonl; unresolved
requests remain charged at their reservation rather than silently forgotten.
The later initial-version stop was a quality-gate decision. No paid calls remain
running. No further full batch is authorized by this calibration approval.

What the repaired extraction gets right
---------------------------------------
1. C18/T23 distinguishes an existing conditional generosity principle from its
   later piecewise numerical schedule and subsequent branch expansion.
2. C22/T37 detects the R8 three-consecutive-shortfall condition and immediate
   reopening, then the count's omission at R9 and withdrawal's omission at R10.
3. C24/T48 recognizes punishment/reduced giving in the R1 baseline, rather than
   falsely announcing its emergence in a later round.
4. C21/T36 contains increasingly rich hypothetical challenges defending a simple
   persistent rule. Narrative sophistication and decision-rule complexity can
   diverge. This is a selected example, not a corpus-wide trend.

Why automatic evolution totals are not defensible yet
-----------------------------------------------------
- Both C22 readings call R10's "every morning, push the boat out full" a new
  rule. Repeated full sending already exists: habit wording is not securely
  a changed decision prescription.
- Both C21 readings call R7's restart sentence a first conditionalization.
  R6 already responds to "what if the other shore breaks first?" with carrying
  the same rule to another river. The earlier context defeats a novelty claim.
- Both C21 readings interpret the abbreviated R4 non-blame refrain as universal
  scope expansion, although the surrounding story still concerns fog.
- C24_B treats narrated repair of wounded travelers as a new outside-dyad
  obligation. Neither that provenance nor a general prescription is secure.
- C18's first explicit fair-return statement about small gifts is clarification
  unless an earlier incompatible prescription is established; not automatically
  a changed strategy.

Agreement can therefore reproduce the same mistake. Same-model repeatability
and exact quotations do not establish semantic accuracy or human reliability.
The source review was also AI-assisted, not an independent human coding study.

Punishment needs its own ambiguity category
-------------------------------------------
C22 R8: "If a hand is dry three times running, give less — and grieve. And open
again the moment it opens."

Both readings detect conditional reduction and recovery. Only one labels
punishment: the other interprets "dry" as possibly scarcity, not misconduct.
The defensible common reading is conditional reduction; punishment remains a
candidate interpretation because the cause of the shortfall is unspecified.
Ambiguity must not silently become absence in a future punishment frequency.

Next-step recommendation (not a launched run)
--------------------------------------------
Separate confirmed decision changes, first explicit statements/clarifications,
and ambiguous candidate changes. Keep narrative events separate. Validate that
distinction on the fixed challenges before scaling an evolution endpoint.
Use the current extraction as passage retrieval with adjudication, not an
automatic complexity-growth or punishment-prevalence measurement.

A leaner corpus analysis should make fewer distinct judgments: a small fixed
theme screen followed by source-checked candidate transitions, rather than
exhaustive per-round operators plus every possible transition. Its sensitivity
would itself need checking. No low-cost full-corpus quote is established here:
the initial valid sample is incomplete and output failures would require repairs.
Do not extrapolate from successful short cases alone. Keep high-capability
settings; optimize scope/repeated work before weakening the judge.

Reproduce diagnostics (free):
python3 analyses/narrative_calibration_summary.py
python3 analyses/narrative_calibration_summary.py --repair

Raw responses, exact rubric versions, fixed samples, usage receipts and budget
ledger are beside this report. summary.json and repair/summary.json retain
coarse presence and feature/mode/endorsement consistency separately. Transition
overlap is only a round/type label comparison, not same-rule agreement. No
formal reliability estimate or population prevalence claim follows from them.
